1. Twisted Pair Cables

Used in telephone lines and local area networks (LANs).

Suitable for both analog and digital transmission.

Commonly connected using RJ-45 connectors.

Wires are twisted to reduce electromagnetic interference.

Two types: Unshielded (UTP) and Shielded (STP).

Advantages: Low cost, easy to install, thin in size, supports high-speed LANs.

2. Coaxial Cable

Made of a copper core surrounded by insulation and a metal shield.

Transmits signals in electrical form.

Shield prevents interference and crosstalk.

Covered with plastic for protection.

Used in cable TV, internet, and some LANs.

3. Fiber Optic Cable

Transmits data as light pulses through glass or plastic fibers.

Supports high bandwidth and long-distance communication.

Immune to electromagnetic interference.

Can be used underwater (submarine cables).

Data transfer is unidirectional.

4. Radio Waves

Frequency range is 3 KHz to 300 GHz.

Easy to generate and can travel long distances.

Omni-directional and can pass through buildings.

Used in indoor and outdoor communications.

5. Microwaves

Frequency range is 1 GHz to 300 GHz.

Used for data, voice, and video communication.

Works over short to medium distances.

Unidirectional in nature.

Cannot penetrate buildings effectively.

6. Infrared Waves

Frequency range is 300 GHz to 400 THz.

Used for very short distance communication.

Cannot pass through obstacles.

Common in TV remotes, wireless mouse, keyboards, etc.

7. Differences Between Radio, Microwave, and Infrared

Radio waves are omni-directional, microwaves and infrared are unidirectional.

Radio and microwaves can penetrate walls at low frequencies; infrared cannot penetrate at all.

Radio wave frequency: 3 KHz to 1 GHz. Microwave: 1 GHz to 300 GHz. Infrared: 300 GHz to 400 THz.

Radio has low security, microwave medium, and infrared high security.

Some frequencies of radio and microwaves require licenses; infrared does not.

Radio and microwaves are used for long-distance; infrared is for short distance.

Radio is moderately priced, microwaves are expensive, infrared is cheap.

8. Analog vs Digital Signals

Analog signals are continuous; digital signals are discrete.

Analog is represented by sine waves; digital by square waves.

Analog used in natural sound and older devices; digital in computers and modern electronics.

Analog has a continuous range of values; digital has discrete values.

Digital is less noisy and more secure than analog.